src/02-templates/gbai.md, before:

# .gbai Architecture

**A bot is just a folder.** The `.gbai` extension marks a directory as a BotServer package containing everything needed to run a conversational AI bot - scripts, documents, configuration, and themes.

## The Dead Simple Structure

```
my-bot.gbai/                    # This folder = your entire bot
  my-bot.gbdialog/           # BASIC conversation scripts
  my-bot.gbkb/               # Documents for Q&A
  my-bot.gbot/               # Configuration
  my-bot.gbtheme/            # Optional UI customization
```

That's it. No manifests, no build files, no dependencies. Copy the folder to deploy.

### Visual Architecture
### Architecture

<img src="../assets/chapter-02/package-structure.svg" alt="Package Structure" style="max-height: 400px; width: 100%; object-fit: contain;">

## How Bootstrap Finds Bots

At startup, BotServer scans `templates/` for any folder ending in `.gbai`:

```
templates/
  default.gbai/       → Creates bot at /default
  support.gbai/       → Creates bot at /support  
  sales.gbai/         → Creates bot at /sales
```

Each `.gbai` becomes a URL endpoint automatically. Zero configuration.

## What Goes Where

### .gbdialog/ - Your Bot's Brain

BASIC scripts that control conversation flow:

```
my-bot.gbdialog/
  start.bas           # Optional - needed to activate tools/KB
  auth.bas            # Login flow
  tools/              # Callable functions
    book-meeting.bas
    check-status.bas
  handlers/           # Event responses
    on-email.bas
```

Example `start.bas` (optional, but required for tools/KB):
```basic
USE KB "policies"
USE TOOL "book-meeting"
USE TOOL "check-status"
TALK "Hi! I'm your assistant with tools and knowledge ready."
```

Note: If you don't need tools or knowledge bases, `start.bas` is optional. The LLM will handle basic conversations without it.

### .gbkb/ - Your Bot's Knowledge

Documents organized by topic:

```
my-bot.gbkb/
  policies/           # HR documents
    vacation.pdf
    handbook.docx
  products/           # Product info
    catalog.pdf
    pricing.xlsx
  support/            # Help docs
    faq.md
```

Each folder becomes a searchable collection. Drop files in, bot learns automatically.

### .gbot/ - Your Bot's Settings

Single `config.csv` file with key-value pairs:

```csv
llm-model,your-preferred-model
temperature,0.7
max-tokens,2000
welcome-message,Hello! How can I help?
session-timeout,1800
```

No complex JSON or YAML. Just simple CSV that opens in Excel.

### .gbtheme/ - Your Bot's Look (Optional)

Custom web interface styling:

```
my-bot.gbtheme/
  styles.css          # Custom CSS
  logo.png           # Brand assets
  templates/         # HTML overrides
    chat.html
```

If missing, uses default theme. Most bots don't need this.

## Real Example: Support Bot

Here's a complete customer support bot:

```
support.gbai/
  support.gbdialog/
    start.bas         # Optional, but needed for tools/KB
    tools/
      create-ticket.bas
      check-status.bas
  support.gbkb/
    faqs/
      common-questions.pdf
    guides/
      troubleshooting.docx
  support.gbot/
    config.csv
```

`start.bas` (activates tools and knowledge bases):
```basic
USE KB "faqs"
USE KB "guides"
USE TOOL "create-ticket"
USE TOOL "check-status"

TALK "Support bot ready. How can I help?"
```

`create-ticket.bas`:
```basic
PARAM issue, priority
DESCRIPTION "Creates support ticket"

ticket_id = GENERATE_ID()
SAVE "tickets.csv", ticket_id, issue, priority, NOW()
TALK "Ticket #" + ticket_id + " created"
```

`config.csv`:
```csv
llm-model,your-preferred-model
bot-name,TechSupport
greeting,Welcome to support!
```

## Deployment = Copy Folder

### Local Development
```bash
cp -r my-bot.gbai/ templates/
./botserver restart
# Visit http://localhost:8080/my-bot
```

### Production Server
```bash
scp -r my-bot.gbai/ server:~/botserver/templates/
ssh server "cd botserver && ./botserver restart"
```
### Deployment

### LXC Container
```bash
lxc file push my-bot.gbai/ container/app/templates/
```

No build step. No compilation. Just copy files.

## Multi-Bot Hosting

One BotServer runs multiple bots:

```
templates/
  support.gbai/       # support.example.com
  sales.gbai/         # sales.example.com
  internal.gbai/      # internal.example.com
  public.gbai/        # www.example.com
```

Each bot:
- Gets own URL endpoint
- Has isolated sessions
- Runs independently
- Shares infrastructure



## Naming Conventions

### Required
- Folder must end with `.gbai`
- Subfolders must match: `botname.gbdialog`, `botname.gbkb`, etc.
- `start.bas` is optional, but required if you want to use tools or knowledge bases (must USE TOOL and USE KB to activate them)

### Recommended
- Use lowercase with hyphens: `customer-service.gbai`
- Group related bots: `support-tier1.gbai`, `support-tier2.gbai`
- Version in folder name if needed: `chatbot-v2.gbai`

## Bootstrap Process

When BotServer starts:

<img src="../assets/chapter-02/template-deployment-flow.svg" alt="Template Deployment Flow" style="max-height: 400px; width: 100%; object-fit: contain;">

Takes about 5-10 seconds per bot.

## UI Architecture

The web interface uses **HTMX with server-side rendering** - minimal client-side code:
- Askama templates for HTML generation
- HTMX for dynamic updates without JavaScript
- No webpack, no npm build
- Edit and refresh to see changes
- Zero compilation time

## Package Size Limits

Default limits (configurable in `config.csv`):

| Setting | Default | config.csv key |
|---------|---------|----------------|
| Total package | 100MB | `package-max-size` |
| Single document | 10MB | `user-file-limit` |
| Number of files | 1000 | `user-file-count` |
| Script size | 1MB | `script-max-size` |
| Collection count | 50 | `kb-max-collections` |

Example override in your bot's `config.csv`:

```csv
name,value
package-max-size,209715200
user-file-limit,52428800
```

## Troubleshooting

**Bot not appearing?**
- Check folder ends with `.gbai`
- Verify subfolders match bot name
- If using tools/KB, ensure `start.bas` exists with USE TOOL/USE KB commands

**Documents not searchable?**
- Ensure files are in `.gbkb/` subfolder
- Check file format is supported
- Wait 30 seconds for indexing

**Scripts not running?**
- Validate BASIC syntax
- Check file has `.bas` extension
- Review logs for errors

## Best Practices

### Do's
- Keep packages under 50MB  
- Organize knowledge by topic  
- Use clear folder names  
- Test locally first  

### Don'ts
- Don't nest `.gbai` folders  
- Don't mix test/prod in same folder  
- Don't hardcode absolute paths  
- Don't store secrets in scripts  

## Summary

The `.gbai` architecture keeps bot development simple. No complex frameworks, no build systems, no deployment pipelines. Just organize your files in folders, and BotServer handles the rest. Focus on content and conversation, not configuration.

Next: Learn about [.gbdialog Dialogs](./gbdialog.md) for writing conversation scripts.

Commit message:

Lowercase botserver/botbook references, add bottemplates repo, update autonomous tasks docs

src/02-templates/gbai.md, after:

# .gbai Architecture

**A bot is just a folder.** The `.gbai` extension marks a directory as a botserver package containing everything needed to run a conversational AI bot - scripts, documents, configuration, and themes.

## The Dead Simple Structure

```
my-bot.gbai/                    # This folder = your entire bot
  my-bot.gbdialog/           # BASIC conversation scripts
  my-bot.gbkb/               # Documents for Q&A
  my-bot.gbot/               # Configuration
  my-bot.gbtheme/            # Optional UI customization
```

That's it. No manifests, no build files, no dependencies. Copy the folder to deploy.

### Visual Architecture
### Architecture

<img src="../assets/chapter-02/package-structure.svg" alt="Package Structure" style="max-height: 400px; width: 100%; object-fit: contain;">

## How Bootstrap Finds Bots

At startup, botserver scans `templates/` for any folder ending in `.gbai`:

```
templates/
  default.gbai/       → Creates bot at /default
  support.gbai/       → Creates bot at /support  
  sales.gbai/         → Creates bot at /sales
```

Each `.gbai` becomes a URL endpoint automatically. Zero configuration.

## What Goes Where

### .gbdialog/ - Your Bot's Brain

BASIC scripts that control conversation flow:

```
my-bot.gbdialog/
  start.bas           # Optional - needed to activate tools/KB
  auth.bas            # Login flow
  tools/              # Callable functions
    book-meeting.bas
    check-status.bas
  handlers/           # Event responses
    on-email.bas
```

Example `start.bas` (optional, but required for tools/KB):
```basic
USE KB "policies"
USE TOOL "book-meeting"
USE TOOL "check-status"
TALK "Hi! I'm your assistant with tools and knowledge ready."
```

Note: If you don't need tools or knowledge bases, `start.bas` is optional. The LLM will handle basic conversations without it.

### .gbkb/ - Your Bot's Knowledge

Documents organized by topic:

```
my-bot.gbkb/
  policies/           # HR documents
    vacation.pdf
    handbook.docx
  products/           # Product info
    catalog.pdf
    pricing.xlsx
  support/            # Help docs
    faq.md
```

Each folder becomes a searchable collection. Drop files in, bot learns automatically.

### .gbot/ - Your Bot's Settings

Single `config.csv` file with key-value pairs:

```csv
llm-model,your-preferred-model
temperature,0.7
max-tokens,2000
welcome-message,Hello! How can I help?
session-timeout,1800
```

No complex JSON or YAML. Just simple CSV that opens in Excel.

### .gbtheme/ - Your Bot's Look (Optional)

Custom web interface styling:

```
my-bot.gbtheme/
  styles.css          # Custom CSS
  logo.png           # Brand assets
  templates/         # HTML overrides
    chat.html
```

If missing, uses default theme. Most bots don't need this.

## Real Example: Support Bot

Here's a complete customer support bot:

```
support.gbai/
  support.gbdialog/
    start.bas         # Optional, but needed for tools/KB
    tools/
      create-ticket.bas
      check-status.bas
  support.gbkb/
    faqs/
      common-questions.pdf
    guides/
      troubleshooting.docx
  support.gbot/
    config.csv
```

`start.bas` (activates tools and knowledge bases):
```basic
USE KB "faqs"
USE KB "guides"
USE TOOL "create-ticket"
USE TOOL "check-status"

TALK "Support bot ready. How can I help?"
```

`create-ticket.bas`:
```basic
PARAM issue, priority
DESCRIPTION "Creates support ticket"

ticket_id = GENERATE_ID()
SAVE "tickets.csv", ticket_id, issue, priority, NOW()
TALK "Ticket #" + ticket_id + " created"
```

`config.csv`:
```csv
llm-model,your-preferred-model
bot-name,TechSupport
greeting,Welcome to support!
```

## Deployment = Copy Folder

### Local Development
```bash
cp -r my-bot.gbai/ templates/
./botserver restart
# Visit http://localhost:8080/my-bot
```

### Production Server
```bash
scp -r my-bot.gbai/ server:~/botserver/templates/
ssh server "cd botserver && ./botserver restart"
```
### Deployment

### LXC Container
```bash
lxc file push my-bot.gbai/ container/app/templates/
```

No build step. No compilation. Just copy files.

## Multi-Bot Hosting

One botserver runs multiple bots:

```
templates/
  support.gbai/       # support.example.com
  sales.gbai/         # sales.example.com
  internal.gbai/      # internal.example.com
  public.gbai/        # www.example.com
```

Each bot:
- Gets own URL endpoint
- Has isolated sessions
- Runs independently
- Shares infrastructure



## Naming Conventions

### Required
- Folder must end with `.gbai`
- Subfolders must match: `botname.gbdialog`, `botname.gbkb`, etc.
- `start.bas` is optional, but required if you want to use tools or knowledge bases (must USE TOOL and USE KB to activate them)

### Recommended
- Use lowercase with hyphens: `customer-service.gbai`
- Group related bots: `support-tier1.gbai`, `support-tier2.gbai`
- Version in folder name if needed: `chatbot-v2.gbai`

## Bootstrap Process

When botserver starts:

<img src="../assets/chapter-02/template-deployment-flow.svg" alt="Template Deployment Flow" style="max-height: 400px; width: 100%; object-fit: contain;">

Takes about 5-10 seconds per bot.

## UI Architecture

The web interface uses **HTMX with server-side rendering** - minimal client-side code:
- Askama templates for HTML generation
- HTMX for dynamic updates without JavaScript
- No webpack, no npm build
- Edit and refresh to see changes
- Zero compilation time

## Package Size Limits

Default limits (configurable in `config.csv`):

| Setting | Default | config.csv key |
|---------|---------|----------------|
| Total package | 100MB | `package-max-size` |
| Single document | 10MB | `user-file-limit` |
| Number of files | 1000 | `user-file-count` |
| Script size | 1MB | `script-max-size` |
| Collection count | 50 | `kb-max-collections` |

Example override in your bot's `config.csv`:

```csv
name,value
package-max-size,209715200
user-file-limit,52428800
```

## Troubleshooting

**Bot not appearing?**
- Check folder ends with `.gbai`
- Verify subfolders match bot name
- If using tools/KB, ensure `start.bas` exists with USE TOOL/USE KB commands

**Documents not searchable?**
- Ensure files are in `.gbkb/` subfolder
- Check file format is supported
- Wait 30 seconds for indexing

**Scripts not running?**
- Validate BASIC syntax
- Check file has `.bas` extension
- Review logs for errors

## Best Practices

### Do's
- Keep packages under 50MB  
- Organize knowledge by topic  
- Use clear folder names  
- Test locally first  

### Don'ts
- Don't nest `.gbai` folders  
- Don't mix test/prod in same folder  
- Don't hardcode absolute paths  
- Don't store secrets in scripts  

## Summary

The `.gbai` architecture keeps bot development simple. No complex frameworks, no build systems, no deployment pipelines. Just organize your files in folders, and botserver handles the rest. Focus on content and conversation, not configuration.

Next: Learn about [.gbdialog Dialogs](./gbdialog.md) for writing conversation scripts.
